[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Conventional medicine didn't
really play much of a role
in my healing.
And in the end, actually
what healed me, how I healed
myself was through a combination
of eating really high quality
foods and the combination
of not eating at all.
We're looking for the quick fix.
We're looking for
that magic bullet.
And this is probably as close
to an easy, simple, free magic
bullet that ever existed.
>> I got more mobility change in
two days of water fasting than
I did in three weeks of therapy.
And my therapist, last Thursday,
my fourth day into it, he says,
what are you doing?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The advice we give to cut
a few calories is a complete
failure.
>> If you compare a population
of people who never dieted
to a population of
people who diet,
the dieters end up weighing
significantly more than
the non-dieters five
or 10 years later.
So we need to find
new solutions.
>> When someone does fasting,
it's very different than when
someone simply cut calories.
>> So when you fast,
you can look at studies,
and you will see that the basal
metabolic rate does not go down
nearly as much as the
calorie restriction.
>> There's always a sweet
spot for everything.
If you fast for too
long, we'll will
say if you go out more
than say even 10 days,
your metabolism will slow.
And that's what
happens to people
if they try to cut calories
for a very long period of time.
Their metabolism slows.
And when you start refeeding,
you will regain the weight
and regain it very quickly.
>> There's a difference in fat.
The fat that you
carry around the waist
is much more dangerous for you.
This study was just
published last year.
So if you look at trunk of
fat mass, caloric restriction
versus alternate
daily fasting, fasting
was six times better at getting
rid of the dangerous fat.
>> The plan is to
do a seven day fast.
In nine days, I've
lost 18 pounds.
>> I went seven days,
and I lost 20 pounds.
>> I thought no way could I
go this far and not be hungry.
Lots of people noticed
the past couple days
how thin that I look already.
it I'm on day 21 of my 21 day
fast, and I've lost 33 pounds.
>> Your mind is more clear.
>> You're actually
going to be more alert.
You can have more
energy and more time.
>> We've been skiing
for three hours.
And I haven't
eaten for six days,
but I feel plenty energized.
Woo-who.
I feel like I'm almost on
vacation by not eating.
>> The ancient Greek
mathematician Pythagoras,
in fact, he required his
students to fast before they
came into the classroom.
Otherwise, he thought they
wouldn't be smart enough
to figure out what he's doing.
>> So my mind feels as
good as it's ever felt.
>> When you look at fasting,
it's going to give you
the ability to do all those
things at a higher level than
you've ever done them before.
>> A lot of people ask
me, how do you stay so fit
at 44-years-old?
And I quite simply
look them in the eye
and I say, fast before
fitness is the ticket.
>> Activating your body, the
sympathetic nervous system
noradrenaline, and
growth hormone,
all go up during a fast.
You actually can workout
harder than you've ever done.
>> I've always worked out on
an empty stomach in a fasted
state.
>> The challenge is about
fasting is that there's a lot
of misinformation out there.
And there are several
different types.
>> You know, whether you're
talking about an overnight fast
or you're talking
about a 24 hour fast.
Are you talking about 5
day, or 10 day, or 20 day?
People and journalists
and everybody
likes to use the same word.
And this is very
confusing, because each
turns on a completely
different process.
>> This is happening now in
practices like mine all over
the country and in the
world, people learning.
And hopefully, we'll
all communicate.
And one of the beauties
of a film like this
is that it will bring
attention to the whole concept
of fasting, because so many
people know nothing about it.
>> For the last 50
years, we've told people,
eat six meals a day.
Eat the minute that you get up
within 30 minutes of getting up
and make sure you eat a bedtime
snack so you don't get hungry.
Problem is when you start eating
the minute you get up and don't
stop eating until the
minute you go to bed,
you're constantly telling your
body to store food energy.
And you can either only
either store it or burn it.
You can't do both at once.
>> And even now, many personal
trainers and nutritionists will
tell try to eat something in
every two to three hours you
are awake.
And if we are
awake for 18 hours,
then that's a long
period of eating.
>> Our problem is
eating all the time.
So the very word
itself, breakfast,
is the meal that
breaks your fast.
And it's actually a
very interesting word,
because what it
means is that fasting
is a part of everyday life.
It's something you need
to do every single day,
because it's the
flip side of eating.
And it's just the
B side of eating.
There's nothing
scary about fasting.
So if you fast for 12
hours and eat for 12 hours
or eat for 10 hours and fast
for 14 hours, for example,
you'll stay in balance.
And guess what?
That's what they did
in 1960s America.
You can look back at surveys.
And the average number of meals,
1977, is three meals a day.
So I grew up in the 1970s,
breakfast, lunch, dinner,
nothing else, snacks, no.
Guess what?
They're eating white bread.
There's no whole wheat pastas.
They're eating Oreo cookies.
They're eating ice cream, but
there's very little obesity.
Now you go to 2005
and the survey,
the NHANES survey, which
is a large American survey
of a lot of things,
including dietary habits,
says that we're eating
six times a day.
So again, look at my
son's schedule, breakfast,
mid-morning snack, lunch,
after school snack, dinner--
oh, hey, he's playing soccer--
there's snack between the half
of soccer, six times a day,
every single day.
So he's giving his
body instructions
to store fat every minute
of that waking day.
And then we wonder why
is he gaining weight.
Well, there's no mystery.
You're eating all the time.
>> We would never even consider
starting to cook until 7:30.
And we usually eat around 8:00.
>> We might get home and eat at
8 or 9 o'clock and have a big
meal at 8:00 or 9:00.
>> And it was a grazing after
dinner that was going on.
>> It's the length of time that
you let your body kind of burn
that you've taken.
That's basically it.
You're giving your
body time to digest it.
>> If you have them continue
their same type of food intake
and about the same
number of calories,
but you shrink that eating time
down, they will lose weight.
And they'll feel satisfied.
And they won't feel miserable,
because we didn't put
them a the 1,600 calorie diet.
>> I've not
necessarily eaten well.
I've been overweight
sometimes up to 200 pounds.
>> Like everybody else, I've
gained a pound or two a year
since I was 30.
>> About three years ago, I was
diagnosed with type 2 diabetes.
My A1C was over 14.
And I had no idea that it
was out of control the way
that it was.
I knew that I'd probably had
it based on the symptoms.
So I just tried to control
it with diet, medication,
but in the end, it just
wasn't working for me
what I was doing.
So I decided it was time
to switch doctors, got
a recommendation to Dr. Julie.
And she rocked my world.
>> First, came upon that
study, Dr. Panda's study,
it was very easy to understand.
It's so elegantly
done, that someone
who's not in high level research
could understand this paper.
>> Big gnarly study
with a lot of detail,
tons of charts and graphs, big
words and back and forth with
Wikipedia.
Took like four hours to
get through that study.
>> I embrace the information,
because it's something new.
And it is a void in
most people's knowledge
base in terms of
nutrition and diet.
And it does sort of
dispel this myth that you
need to eat before
bedtime or you
need to have protein before
bedtime to build muscle mass.
>> So on the flight
back to the West Coast,
I read it again for four hours.
It was on that flight that
I said, I got to try this.
>> So this simple experiment
that we did was we took
genetically identical
set of mice.
>> One group was
eating ad libitum.
So they got to eat their
food throughout the day
whenever they wanted to eat it.
And they're both
these groups of rats
are on a super size me diet.
You know, like that
guy from that movie.
>> I started with
a high fat diet,
because there are 11,000
research papers published
so far, where animals or humans
are given this fatty food.
And this fatty food
causes different diseases
starting from diabetes,
obesity, liver damage, cancer,
and IBD, inflammatory
bowel disease, et cetera.
>> The lead mouse without
a doubt became obese,
gained weight.
The lean between mouse that was
on that time-restricted regime
actually stayed lean.
And that's really what
caught my attention.
>> So even though they eat
the same amount of calories,
at the end, the time-restricted
eating mice are lean compared
to the ad lib fed mice.
>> And they could stay
progressively fitter.
And all they had to do
with change when they eat,
not what they eat.
>> Your body needs a
daily fasting period.
And that eating irradically and
kind of eating all over the day
takes away from our
body's natural rhythms
to say this is when we
eat, this is when we rest,
and it's hitting a
manual override button.
>> We work with the
circadian rhythm.
Our bodies are on
a clock basically,
which is aligned with the 24
hour rotation of the Earth.
>> The circadian rhythm and
turning on and off of more than
10,000 genes is the largest
regulatory network that we know
that exist in human.
>> Circadian rhythms in
the liver, the pancreas,
and the fat cells get
tremendously disrupted when you
eat late at night or when you
eat for more than 12 hours
during the day.
>> So if the liver clock
tracks when we eat,
then forget about light, dark,
but we have to more careful
about is when we eat
and when we fast.
>> And we have to stay in
beat with earth in order to be
healthy.
So we really should
stop eating by 7
PM at the latest, because
our pancreas goes to sleep.
>> Just before you wake
up, somewhere around 4 AM,
growth hormone, adrenaline,
and so on all get pumped up.
You're basically activating
yourself for the day.
So for all those
people who say, oh, you
have to get up and
eat because you're not
going to have energy, like your
body has already prepared you
for everything
you're going to do.
You don't need to do it again.
>> And so during the day,
we need to be able to go out
and hunt and get our food.
And do all those
kinds of good things.
So we need access to energy.
We need to be able to
metabolize energy quickly.
And we think we need to
be able to make sugar
as quickly as possible.
And we also need to be able
to oxidize fats for energy.
So at night, we can't absorb
the fat, and the salt,
and the sugar.
Your body just
takes it and shoves
it right into a fat
store in the evening.
Once we get ready for bed, our
body switches to another mode.
And the circadian rhythms for
processing energy go down.
And the circadian
rhythms that help
with the repair of the
body, finding cancer cells,
renewing all of the
bodily systems kick in.
And those are the strongest
during the night, immune system
function, et cetera.
If you eat during the
night, you disrupt
all of those mechanisms.
And so not only are you
predisposing yourself
to diabetes and obesity
and hypertension,
but you're also
predisposing yourself
to a pro-inflammatory condition
throughout the body, which
makes it easier for
cancer to take hold.
>> If you're trying
to repair a highway,
you have to stop the traffic.
So similarly, our body cannot
repair itself if we continue
to eat.
>> The body makes less insulin.
So for the same sugar load
that you would give yourself
during the day that would not
cause your blood sugar to rise
significantly, that
same sugar load
after about 7 or
8 o'clock at night
will cause a significant
rise in your blood sugar,
mimicking the
effects of diabetes.
>> With a study that came out in
a neurology journal that found
if you were giving artificial
nutrition in the hospital,
that patients did better if
you didn't give it around
the clock.
They gave the nutrition
in a shortened frame.
They're connecting the
person back to the day cycle.
They have a better outcome.
>> I just haven't weighed
myself this morning.
You know, two months
now have gone by.
And I've dropped to somewhere
in the neighborhood of 29 pounds
just with Dr. Julie.
It wasn't hard to do, because
it was just a small habit change
that I had to ask them to make.
All they had to
do was apply this
shortening their total time
of eating during the day.
>> Hi, Dr. Julie.
>> How are you?
>> Good.
How are you?
Good to see you.
Thanks for coming today.
So we're going to go
over your blood test.
Is that right?
And you had them drawn already.
Perfect.
So when I have people come
in and they'll tell me,
oh, well, my parents
have high blood pressure
so that's probably
why I have it.
It's not always a genetically
inherited problem.
It's possibly a lifestyle
inherited problem,
because we carry
with us the type
of habits that our parents
brought us up to have.
And if late night
eating and indulging
slightly on the weekends was
something that we saw them do
or that we were allowed
to do growing up,
we're going to carry
that habit with us.
>> And that first
night was a struggle.
I remember getting off
my plane down in Burbank
and getting ready to take
an hour and a half drive
to Santa Barbara
and thinking, OK,
where am I going to stop to get
something sweet for the road.
And I went, wait,
it's past 6 o'clock.
>> And I found that the first
week was very uncomfortable.
I mean, I went to bed
with hunger pains.
And that's all I
could do to stay
on this time-restrictive
eating time frame
was to go to bed early so
that I wouldn't feel hungry.
>> And Dr. Julie had given me
the advice that the first two
weeks we're going
to be very hard.
>> After about a week, there
was hunger pains completely went
away.
And she was right, but I
was glad she shared that,
because it prepared me.
>> And then after that,
it was no craving.
So it was really strange,
but cravings for food
later in the evening
just went away.
>> Your liver tests
look fantastic.
In fact, they were
lower than they
were before the previous time.
>> OK.
I'm glad.
>> Yeah.
So you're fatty liver
is completely reversed.
You have a totally
normal liver enzymes.
And you did it purely by
just lifestyle changes.
Within a couple
of months, you can
have reversal of fatty liver.
You can start seeing
blood sugar changes
in less than two months.
I mean, it's like
better than medicine.
Debra was a new patient to me.
>> My concern is that I've
been told I should take blood
pressure medicine to
control my blood pressure.
>> Her one fear was being
on a blood pressure medicine
for the rest of her life.
>> I think it's gotten in had
gotten in the 150s and 160s.
>> And her blood pressure was
running in the hypertensive
range.
So she was running over 140.
>> I just didn't like
the side effects.
I was falling
asleep at the wheel.
>> And she was given the
recommendation of trying
to just restrict her eating
time to about 11 or 12 hours.
And two weeks later, she came
in and her blood pressure
was normal, 120s
to 130s systolic.
>> My blood pressure read--
I don't know if have
it-- it was is 126 over--
>> 70.
>> Yes.
It hasn't been that for a while.
>> And she came in again a
few weeks later and her blood
pressure was normal again.
It's like your daily medicine.
These medical conditions, we
should be thinking about them
as really symptoms.
I mean, it's really not
a medical condition,
because it's totally reversible.
You noticed a sleep improvement
with a diet in this lifestyle
change over some of the other
things you tried before.
>> And a much sounder sleep.
>> Yes.
That's interesting,
because I hear
people bring that up to me.
Essentially, she's not
a hypertensive patient
any longer.
>> I located Dr. Julie
Wei-Shatzel shots up and I said
I really, really need to get
this weight under control.
It's out of control.
She said, would you be
interested in participating
in a study?
>> What we're trying to do
now is to expand this study.
The original study was done
in 150 adults in San Diego.
We are now running
a worldwide study.
We have almost 9,000 users.
>> She explained to me about
the circadian clock app.
Now the launch of this
app, My Circadian Clock.
We have close to 10,000
people who have downloaded.
>> I downloaded his app.
And so I went
through the process
of taking pictures of the
food that I ate every day.
And then also making
sure that I fasted
for a minimum of 12
hours each night,
like with dinner being at 6:00.
>> First two weeks we asked you
to log everything you currently
do.
And then at the end
of those two weeks,
you get a summary of
everything that you've done.
It's kind of shocking to
see how much you forget.
And when you look back and
have the hard evidence,
it's really helpful.
>> Using that app is really to
me much more useful than using
something like Fitbit, because
you're going to maximize
your circadian rhythm.
And all of your organs
run on circadian rhythm.
>> I think one of the exciting
things that we've seen is that
people are pretty able
to adapt to this style.
If we say you can still
have that piece of cake,
but you just can't
eat it after 6:00 PM,
people are a lot
more open to that.
And they'll adjust when they
eat their types of food and say,
OK, you know what I can
have it in the morning.
>> Within about eight months of
about a 12 hour fasting window
every day, I found that my
triglycerides have gotten well
below any number I had been
able to achieve previously.
And I also found
that my A1C had also
fallen to the lowest point
it had been in years.
>> I realized so
much benefit so fast.
In the first 90 days,
I lost 11 pounds.
And in 180 days,
I lost 16 pounds.
I'm trim anyway.
I was 153 pounds when I started.
As I got through
that, I wrapped myself
around the mantra of
don't change what you eat,
just change when you eat.
So I actually might have
started eating worse.
So I could have confounded
the study a little bit,
but by eating worse,
because I felt
like I could eat
whatever I wanted and I
was getting good results.
I wasn't dieting.
So after that study,
I met with Satchin
and I asked him about that.
And he kind of chuckled
and laughed and said,
no, Bill, don't eat whatever
you want, but do control
when you eat.
>> My blood pressure
was elevated.
I was on medication for
high blood pressure,
as well as for cholesterol.
The past year, since using
time-restricted feeding,
I have actually--
I've lost 20 pounds.
My blood pressure is excellent.
And I'm no longer
taking statin drugs.
>> Implementing time-restricted
feeding is an easy first step
to take.
It has no cost.
It has no side effects.
And it's feel so much better
than taking medication.
>> In 2004, I decided to
take a personal challenge,
and I was going to
try a triathlon.
I tried a half Ironman.
So that's a 50 mile bike
ride, a 1.6 mile swim.
And it was a 12.1 mile run.
My performance has
degraded over the years
to where I'm doing
just sprint triathlons.
That's 1/4 of that half Ironman.
You would have
thought that I would
have progressed to actually
doing the full Ironman.
So I have it.
Well, it turns out that I
have a cardio condition, where
my heart beats super
rapidly and irregularly,
but what will
happen is it'll beat
at 250 to 300 beats a minute.
And it's like a boat
cavitating a propeller.
It doesn't bite.
And so there's no blood
pumping through my heart.
And I get all lightheaded,
and I might pass out.
It can happen anywhere.
And so I've progressively
been doing shorter and shorter
distance triathlons.
At the end of this
study, it was allowing
me to run longer and harder,
to ride farther and faster,
and to swim longer
and more smoothly.
And so I felt like this next
triathlon, I'll see how I do.
And I went ahead and I
signed up for the Olympic.
That's a double
sprint triathlon.
And so the interesting
short of it
is, no cardiac
problems, completed
the Olympic triathlon.
>> If you can just implement
that first portion of it,
then the rest of the healthy
changes will come along.
>> When you put the
mice on the treadmill,
you know very well like you
would do for a human treadmill,
they run much longer when they
are on time-restricted feeding
then on ad lit feed control,
suggesting that there is some
cardiovascular benefits to
time-restricted feeding.
>> When I'm up in the morning.
I feel like I'm alert quicker
than I have been previously.
>> I would say that obesity
is probably the single major
largest challenge in America
these days in terms of overall
health and chronic disease.
>> The category of
people are very obese.
And they're not
necessarily consuming
significantly more calories.
Oftentimes, these people
have some difficulty
sleeping through the night.
And so if they're getting up
later in the evening or early
in the morning, they'll
just go and have a snack.
They'll have something to
eat or something to drink.
That actually increases
their total eating time
to much greater than 15 hours.
In fact, they may be
eating 20 hours a day.
>> Flying back on the plane,
I'm reading the study.
I'm starting to understand
what's going on.
There was a third group of mice
that was really interesting.
They had a control
group that was
five days on the
time-restricted feeding regime
and two days off.
And so the idea is that might
mirror our five day working
schedule and our two
day off schedule.
>> So I've wanted to try with
you could party on the weekend.
So I had one group of
mice that were only
on time-restricted feeding
during the weekdays,
but then they would have
full access, 24 hours
access to food
during the weekends.
So we call this the 5T2A
regimen for five days
on time-restricted
feeding and two days
ad lib starting on Friday night.
Good news is there's no
difference between being
seven days in
time-restricted feeding
or only five day time-restricted
feeding, at least in mice.
So if you're a mice, you
can party on the weekend.
>> All of health care
should be embracing this.
We should be using this.
>> We're really not
telling people what to eat.
We're telling
people when to eat.
I think that this could
give us an excellent way
to initiate a long-term
and effective treatment
for obesity.
>> Even if you eat healthy
foods after 7:00 PM,
you actually push your body.
You push your pancreas,
your beta cells,
and you actually become
more inclined to develop
pre-diabetes and diabetes.
>> When we compare the high fat
diet fed animals and the ones
that were on
time-restricted feeding,
there was a massive difference.
Basically, the ones on
time-restricted feeding,
they don't have this type
2 diabetes problem anymore.
>> From what I've seen, when
someone adopts time-restricted
feeding, that's all
they need to do.
That's all they need to
do to completely reverse
this hypoglycemia to
completely take them out
of this pre-diabetic state.
I had one woman who was running
pre-diabetic for two years.
We had her follow
time-restricted feeding
for a few weeks.
And her blood sugar came back
normal, absolutely normal.
We tested her.
Again a few months later.
And her blood sugar was
again normal as well as
her hemoglobin A1C and
that hemoglobin A1C
is a marker for your blood sugar
over the past three months.
And so for her, the burden
of developing diabetes
was completely lifted.
She didn't have to worry about
that disease entity anymore
at all.
>> Diabetes is
completely off the chart.
Metabolic syndrome
is off the chart.
We can't solve that
with drug interventions,
but a cultural change, where
we learn to eat in a window
that we were at before,
that seems kind of doable.
It's the kind of thing
that a group could start.
You could teach
children in school.
We could observe that at home.
We could walk the talk.
And that might make such a big
difference on a national scale
that it actually
moves the needle.
>> If physicians are more
involved in helping people make
this lifestyle change, I think
it will be an overall cost
savings for just
medicine in general,
because we're going to be
spending less on medication.
We're going to be
spending less on disease.
You know, that Super Size Me
guy should do his whole routine
again.
You know, he should
do his whole eating
that Super Size Me diet, but
under a shorter time frame.
And I wondered if he'd have
all those health effects.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What we're doing here is
really reversing all of type 2
diabetes and all its downstream
complications with fasting.
>> I've worked with Jason
for 17 years, nephrology.
And we're just watching our
patients die from diabetes,
essentially watching them
get more and more obese,
watching their blood sugars get
worse, and worse, and worse.
Their medications
go through the roof.
Like they're on two or
three pages of medications.
And every time we saw
a patient, they're
are more and more drugs.
>> And I was basically
holding their hand as they had
their heart attacks, as
they went on dialysis,
as they developed kidney
failures and strokes.
>> That's how we got into
this in the first place.
It was really
disheartening to watch
people die before our eyes.
>> So one day, I was
talking to a friend.
And she was talking
about doing a cleanse.
And I realized that really what
she's talking about is a fast.
And I thought, wow, that's
a really stupid idea,
but then I thought for a second.
OK, well, this was
my initial reaction.
And most people have that same
sort of eye rolling reaction
to the word fasting.
And I thought, OK,
but I'm a physician.
What exactly is it that's
so bad about the fasting,
because she actually had
pretty decent results?
She always says
she feels better.
She doesn't feel hungry.
And I thought, OK, well,
that's very interesting.
So then I started to
look at the fasting.
I thought, why not, like
why not have people fast?
I mean, what honestly is
more obvious than fasting?
If you don't eat, your
blood sugars will come down,
and you no longer need
a diabetic medications.
Hey, that's great.
If you don't eat,
you will lose weight.
Hey, that's great.
Where is the downside?
>> Anne's hemoglobin A1C
was so high that the lab
couldn't detect it.
>> Groups like Alcoholics
Anonymous and Weight Watchers,
they're all
group-based sessions.
>> So, Anne, can you tell
us about your first fast?
They're not individually
counseling sessions,
because you're losing a
very important support
structure there.
>> Yes, Dr. Fong
said 7 or 14 days.
>> So that's one of the lessons
we've learned when we've gone
to these kind of group sessions.
>> In the beginning, it's a pain
in the butt to get over that--
the first two day hump.
And then after that,
it's really easy.
It seems really easy.
Like, I can't believe
I'm not eating.
So I stopped at 10 days.
>> Since then you
haven't touched insulin.
You haven't needed to.
>> If I went Monday,
Wednesday, Friday,
but then you're going through
those hunger pains, you know,
where your stomachs growling,
you feel like you get ravenous,
like you could eat a horse.
>> What reading did you
get this this morning?
>> I got down to
6.4 in the morning.
>> Nice.
So I started intermittent
fasting about five years ago.
And within six months, I had
reversed my hemoglobin A1C
from 6.4% to 4.6% percent.
I was diagnosed with fatty
liver disease when I was 12.
In six months, no more
fatty liver infiltration.
Another thing that I was
diagnosed with when I was 14
was polycystic ovarian syndrome.
And I would go to
the hospital all
of the time from cyst rupturing
and it just being so painful.
You couldn't bear it.
About six months into fasting,
everything sort of regulated.
And when I saw another
specialist later on, my OB,
we started talking about it.
And she said Megan,
when is the last time
you had a cyst rupture?
And I said, I don't know.
I don't remember.
And I said.
I know my periods
are regular now.
And so she's had me
for an ultrasound.
And everything and
atomically, there
is no sign of polycystic
ovarian syndrome, none at all,
which is pretty mind-blowing.
And my progesterone hormones
and all my fertility
stuff, and it was all fantastic.
It was so much
better than it was
when I was a teenager
in my early 20s
when the had mentioned those.
So fertility for
me is not really
going to be an issue anymore.
And I spent most
of my life thinking
that I wouldn't be
able to have babies.
And they actually
saw me improve.
So I think that's how we
got some initial success
and how our program really
started to snowball.
People just didn't want
to die from diabetes.
>> But I was
walking with a cane.
I wasn't breathing well.
I had put on 130 pounds
with the insulin.
>> Patients come back to
me with incredible stories.
>> I was taking 210
units of insulin a day.
I did the 21-day fast.
And I haven't had insulin since.
I've lost close to 100 pounds.
>> So every day I come in,
almost every single day I come
in and I say, wow, Mr. So-and-so
or Mrs. So-and-so, look,
your numbers are such to
the point that you are not
classified as diabetic.
That is amazing.
>> It saved my life
is what it did.
>> Off the COVERSYL, too,
for your blood pressure.
So you're off of everything.
And around her waist, she
has lost 27 centimeters.
>> Sometimes people find that
when they fast that a lot
of these cravings just stop.
>> Well, my control
is vastly improved.
>> Energy is unbelievable.
As I said, I was
walking with a cane.
>> You've got to treat
everybody as individuals.
And that's what we do.
So we see all different regimens
and use all different regimens.
>> I stop eating at about
7:00 in the evening.
And after that, it
should be just liquids
until dinner the next day.
>> Avocado, slice it
up, with two eggs.
And I will eat that maybe about
10 o'clock in the morning.
I do not eat again until maybe
3, 4 o'clock the next day.
As terrible as it sounds,
I don't even feel hungry.
>> We can tailor it
to people's need.
If you need it for
weight loss, then I
can give you something that's
going to do weight loss,
but you only want to do it
for, say, overall well-being,
mental clarity, well, I'll
give you something different.
>> Sometimes seven
days, it depends.
When I feel that is
a lot comfortable,
then I will take longer one.
>> And the key rule, and
especially for the elderly,
is if you don't feel well stop.
Let us know.
Let's re-evaluate.
>> I'll have a dinner or lunch.
Then you have to take
36 or 24 hours fasting.
That's what I prefer.
>> But the financial benefits
are actually just mind-blowing,
because think about it.
You have type 2
diabetes, obesity.
You've got all kinds of cost.
>> I had a new consult a
couple weeks ago and he said,
I watched my grandparents
follow the guidelines,
and I watched them die.
I watched my parents
follow the guidelines.
And now I'm watching them die.
And they're going to be dead 20
years before my grandparents.
And look at me now.
I'm diabetic.
I have fatty liver disease.
My eyesight is going to hell.
I don't want this to be me.
Clearly, what they're doing
and their method of treatment
that these physicians
are having my--
or had my grandparents
follow and they're having
my parents follow, don't work.
>> You've got your medications.
You've got surgeries.
You've got heart attacks, very
expensive, strokes, hospitals.
You've got stuff.
You need to pay
for nursing care.
for nursing homes.
So an incredible
amount of cost all
built in to take care
of these sick people.
>> I watched my family
die from heart disease.
I watched my grandmother
die from diabetes.
I watched my mother suffer
from diabetes following
the guidelines to a T.
It doesn't work.
Clearly something
is broken there.
And I think people more so
than a lot of physicians
understand that science
needs to evolve.
>> Well, what if you can get rid
of all that for free, for free?
That's just unbelievable.
Then you'd have money
to fight poverty.
And you'd have money for
education at the same time
that everybody's healthier
than they've ever been.
>> And the crazy part is it
doesn't require anything,
but the right knowledge, which
has the potential to save
our entire nation's budget.
Having that diagnosis
of borderline diabetes
and being told by my
family doctor that 6.4%,
that was scary.
I've had cancer.
And the diagnosis of diabetes
being delivered to me
was so much scarier to me
than the cancer diagnosis,
because at least with
cancer, there's a shot.
With diabetes, it's
a death sentence.
And it's a long painful slow,
progressive death sentence.
>> People sometimes say the
three most influential people
in the history of the
world, Jesus Christ,
the prophet Muhammad, and Buddha
probably only agreed on one
thing.
And that was the
power of fasting.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Fasting is an essential
part of our Christian faith.
Christ started by
his own example.
He also commanded his
disciples to fast.
When they were trying
to help other people out
and they weren't
so successful, he
said these problems are only
resolved by fasting and prayer.
>> The scriptures teaches that
there is some things you cannot
do if you don't fast.
Miracles, some miracles
cannot happen without fasting.
>> Fasting is such a personal
experience for everyone who
fasts.
And when it's coupled
with prayer, it changes--
it changes our life.
>> I truly believe that fasting
can change people's heart.
In the scriptures from ancient
times to the present day,
we read about those who fasted.
And in the process of
fasting, they changed.
>> I was living in Peru and
I made the decision to go
to my mission.
My father didn't want me to go.
It was for safety reasons.
The country had a lot
of terrorism problems.
So when I went to talk
to my stake president,
he counseled me to fast and to
pray and then to talk to him.
So I did.
I fasted, and I pray.
And then I went
to talk to my dad.
We cried together.
And he told me that, well,
let me go to my mission
and that I will
have his support.
It's very meaningful
to me, because it was
regarding my mission to serve.
And because of it,
my life changed.
>> It brings me closer to God.
I feel spiritual
strength coming to me,
temporal blessings come from it.
Graduating from
high school I wanted
to know which of
the two colleges
I should go to that I
had been admitted to.
And I really wanted
to be the right place.
And so as I prayed, I determined
fasting would really help me.
And so I fasted.
At the closure of my fast, as I
prayed, it was very clear to me
the choice that I should make.
>> We believe that it is
beneficial both spiritually,
physically.
And, in fact, it has a
humanitarian benefit when
coupled with helping the poor.
>> A greater compassion
for those who are in need
and the greater desire to
serve them comes from fasting.
We learn from the
ancient prophet Isaiah
that God introduced fasting
to the children of Israel.
He even said this is the
fast that I've chosen
and then goes on to
say that its purpose is
to deal bread to the hungry.
We fast once a month for
a period of 24 hours, two
consecutive meals.
And moneys that
are saved from that
fast are donated to
the poor to help them
with all sorts of
humanitarian needs, not enough
money to pay the
electric bill, they
don't have the food
necessary for their children,
for clothing, et cetera,
to help them get themselves
on their feet so they
can become self-reliant.
Every person has the
opportunity to fast.
And even the poorest
among us sometimes
will fast and give
what they can in order
to help their
brothers and sisters.
>> There is seven billion
people in the world.
If we all did this, we
would end world hunger.
>> So I pretty much started
with very turbulent teen years.
I was 14 when I first
moved in with my boyfriend.
I was heavily into the
kind of drug party scene,
like drinking a lot of alcohol,
all that kind of stuff.
I spent a lot of nights up
partying in bars with fake IDs,
drinking, not eating properly,
subsiding on processed food,
eventually developing
septicaemia when I was about
16.
It started from a really
bad case of pneumonia.
About 24 hours later,
I was in the hospital
on intravenous antibiotics for
swollen meninges of the brain,
septicemia, multiple
organ failures,
and severe chronic disease.
My chances of survival
were actually only 40%.
Something changed.
And it was probably a
combination of everything
that went on, but I remember
leaving the hospital.
And I wasn't the same person.
Any like happiness
for life was gone.
I was very apathetic
and depressed.
I seemed to be really
struggling to believe
in a positive future for
myself and self-conscious
and a lot more introverted.
All of this sort of
made me focus on--
made me begin focusing
on what I felt
I could control,
which is what I ate,
how I looked, how
other people saw me.
And I think I used
obsession with my body
and controlling
my intake as a way
to be accepted, feel
connected to the world
and the environment to
be a part of something,
to feel home somewhere.
I remember looking in the
mirror and hating my body
and judging it so harshly.
So I had a lot of different
health conditions.
My main conditions I was
dealing with autoimmune thyroid
disease, extreme hypothyroid,
and thyroid goiter.
So it's actually very difficult
to swallow and eat food.
I had a gastroparesis, so
really slow stomach emptying
and chronic stomach inflammation
and gastritis, probably
from years of an eating
disorder and antibiotics
and all that stuff as well.
I had really bad
irritable bowel syndrome
and chronic inflammatory
bowel disease.
So I was bloated all the time,
a lot of pain in the bathroom,
more than anybody should be.
And my most painful
condition by far
and what actually prompted me to
start my YouTube channel, what
I really focused
on at the beginning
was one of the top three most
painful conditions that exist.
And it was
interstitial cystitis.
So it's a chronic
ulcerative bladder disease.
The symptoms are a lot
of urgency, burning pain,
but you have no life.
You're kind of housebound
and living in your bathroom
in a lot of pain.
This is where I
lived for two years.
I was a prisoner
in my own bathroom.
And I had my identity stripped
by my eating disorder.
I really didn't
have a life at all.
>> Anorexics fast all the time.
I mean, some people may
justify fasting if they
have an eating disorder.
They may say,
well, look, fasting
is fixing all these
other medical problems.
We know that eating disorders
are medical and biological.
We're talking about
brain-based disorder.
Maybe fasting will fix
my eating disorder.
Well, anorexics
fast all the time.
It makes their disorder worst.
Bulimics purge food
in a number of ways.
Self-induced vomiting is the
one that people think about
or misuse of laxatives, which
actually does nothing to get
rid of calories, by the way.
But the other thing that
bulimic do to purge is fast.
So both bulimics
and anorexics fast.
And it makes their
disorder worse.
It does not fix it.
>> We did see that in the
archaeological record.
Bulimics-- in a
member in Rome, they
had the vomitoria where they
would eat and gorge themselves.
And then they'd go throw up.
>> I think that the Romans and
the vomitoriums that they would
have was sort of a
different phenomenon.
That was much more
of a social activity,
where people would go and
overindulge on purpose.
And then they would
vomit in order
to continue to be
able to do that.
Patients with bulimia, where
they will binge and then
purge often by
vomiting, they find
that both the binging and the
purging to be highly shameful.
They will go to great
lengths to hide this
from their friends,
their family.
It's not something they
feel comfortable doing,
in generally, in public.
>> I remember the first
time I actually purged.
And it wasn't with intent.
I literally had
eaten what I thought
I shouldn't after a
long time of anorexia,
after many months of
really starving myself
to the point of insanity.
And I remember I was so hungry.
I couldn't-- I gave in.
It was like a
physiological survival
urge I couldn't ignore.
And I was so anxious
while I was eating that I
felt such an upset stomach.
It felt like I was doing
something so wrong.
And afterwards-- I mean, I
ate until I couldn't breathe.
I couldn't control myself.
It was just-- I was
like my body needed it.
And then I felt so
worried and panicky that I
was going to gain
a ton of weight,
destroy everything
I had already done.
I came in the bathroom
really frantic and scared.
And I sort of leaned
over the toilet bowl.
And I was so painfully
full that just the act
of leaning over, I mean, food
practically came up itself.
And it was so painful coming up.
It was like fire or lava
just shooting out of you.
And at the same time, I was
flooded with a sense of relief.
It was like I could get
rid of all the shame.
I could get rid of all
the pain in my life.
I could just be back to
the way I was before.
And then I would feel
really panicky and shaky.
And I would wonder
if anybody hurt me.
And I would be afraid
that I smelled like vomit.
And I just felt really
dirty and really disgusting.
And I wanted to pretend the
whole thing didn't happen.
So I would rush over to the sink
and just put so much toothpaste
on my toothbrush.
And I was so afraid I
had like splatter on me.
I just felt so disgusting, I
guess, on such a deep level
that I would sit-in the
bath for a long time.
And I would just run the
hot water over my hands
and splash my face and just feel
really ashamed and embarrassed
and hope that nobody ever
knew that I did this,
because it felt like the most
despicable thing on planet
Earth.
>> When the recovery
battle began,
I was 145 pounds and 6 foot 3.
And now I stand
today at 188 pounds.
I just had maybe a inferiority
complex, if you will.
I was bullied as a
little as a young kid
and growing up
through high school.
And it always made me angry.
And it made me mad.
And it felt like, if I
could work out harder,
and if I could watch my
diet even tighter, that's
a way to get back at everybody.
And it caused me to have
very bad social anxiety.
It just led me to a
life of isolation,
because I was afraid
that I was going
to eat something
that was unhealthy,
or I was afraid that I was going
to smell something and want
it and not have it.
And I would feel
massive anxiety.
So I would just talk myself out
of not going to these places.
So I came home for
Thanksgiving one year.
And my brother
handed me this packet
that said orthorexia on it.
And he threw it at me and
he said you have this.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> (SINGING)
Orthorexia is a condition where
you take things to the extreme.
I specifically remember
tracking my calories
and burning approximately 1,800
a day and consuming only 1,400.
And if every day came where
those numbers were reversed,
I would get so
depressed and angry.
It was unbelievable.
And I had to super
compensate the next day
to make sure that I was burning
more than I was consuming.
One of the things
that happens when
you have an eating
disorder is you
go into this specific
type of depression
where you just don't find
pleasure out of things anymore.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
(SINGING)
The only thing that I
really found pleasure out of
was exercising in huge amounts
and working out really hard
and restricting my calories and
seeing how far I can actually
push it or stretch it.
My emotions were
all over the place.
To say life became a struggle
is putting it lightly.
I wouldn't go as far as
saying that I was suicidal,
but I definitely had
given up on life.
And I did not want
to live another day.
I literally would pray
that I would go over
to the streets of Manhattan
in the afternoon to work
and I would get hit by a
bus going out of control
or get killed in gang warfare
or get shot or stabbed to death.
I would have to say
my lowest point was
when I was contemplating
jumping into the East
River in Manhattan.
At that moment, I
just started thinking
about my mom who is back
home, living by herself,
and a lot of my close friends.
And I was wondering, if
they even would care,
because I didn't.
And then my phone rang.
At the very moment, I
stepped onto that rung.
And it was my friend Jessica
back home in Pennsylvania.
And it's ironic how
timing works in this life,
but it couldn't have
come at a better
time, because she
basically talked me
down off of that handrail.
And I went sat down on a bench.
The root problem was I
was so mineral deficient.
And I had such lack
of food in my system
that I just wasn't
thinking properly.
It never really was
about the food per say.
It was more about my interaction
and relationships with people.
Good relationships were fine.
Ones that were a little
rocky just kind of like
triggered me like that.
And I would basically
take everything out
on food and fitness.
When I began this journey back
to normalcy, it was not easy.
It was not an easy road.
I had to accept
the fact that I was
going to gain some weight back.
I was 145 pounds.
I was 6 foot 3.
And I was totally
zeroing in on 140.
And that's how I worked.
I would always go in
five pound increments.
And to me, those
were huge victories.
>> Any food restriction is
problematic for somebody who
has had an eating disorder,
is currently actively trying
to get over an eating disorder,
who has a family history
of an eating disorder.
It's likely to send you
back into an eating disorder
if you have a history of it.
>> For me, fasting has actually
been a remedy in my healing
process.
And I feel that it has helped
my relationship with food.
One of the things that
worked so efficiently for me
to keep my eating disorder in
check is eating in windows.
I feel like I don't have to
put as much thought into food.
It kind of basically
takes my mind off of food.
So I become more relaxed.
And because of that, it improves
my relationship with food.
>> You do you don't see
too many old fat people.
And there is a reason,
because being overweight
is definitely hard
on the system.
I'm a bit overweight.
And I'm worried about it.
I might even look into
this fasting myself.
>> There's essentially two
forms of fasting that are being
advocated currently.
The intermittent fasting,
which is essentially
intermittent feeding, which
you narrow the feeding windows.
You may restrict calories on
one or two days or more a week.
These can be done safely
often on an outpatient basis,
but medically supervised
water only fasting
is a little bit
more complicated.
It does require supervision.
It does require a
contained environment
in order to ensure a safe
and effective experience.
So when we talk
about the long-term,
water only fasting that's done
at facilities like the True
North Health Center
where people are
able to undergo physical
exams, laboratory monitoring,
being in a controlled and
contained environment.
And in that type of a
setting, fasting can be done,
even prolonged fasting
can be done safely.
It's also important
that fasting be
applied at patients at the
right time on the reserve
some people that
have conditions where
they would be better off
with a different approach
than fasting.
Fasting may be too vigorous
or it may be inappropriate,
because of complications
with medical management
or at least until medications
can be withdrawn, et cetera.
So fasting has a wide
range of applications,
but where it does
its best work is
in dealing with conditions
that are caused by excess.
So conditions associated
with dietary excess,
including things like
obesity, high blood pressure,
and other cardiovascular-related
disease, type 2 diabetes,
a host of autoimmune diseases,
and even some forms of cancer
like lymphoma seem to
be intimately associated
with our diet and
lifestyle choices.
And so it makes sense that
where dietary excess is
a contributing factor
to the problem,
fasting may be a helpful
means of rapidly giving
the body a chance to reverse the
consequences of dietary excess.
>> In 1994, I had a head injury.
And when I regained
consciousness,
I had a terrible headache.
And prior to the accident, I
had been a practicing dentist.
So because of the nerve
damage to my hands,
I also had to quit
practicing dentistry.
I sought medical advice to
get rid of the headache.
I visited with
several neurologists.
They were unable to help me.
I also tried some alternative
treatments, acupuncture,
cupping.
Unfortunately, nothing
was able to help me.
I had a headache every
day or 16 years, 24/7.
It just never, ever went away.
So the neurologist
told me that the reason
I had this never-ending
headache was
because the dura mater,
the leather-like covering
of the brain and the
spinal cord had been torn
and had become inflamed.
And then when I saw on
the True North website
that a number of the health
conditions that they treated
were based on inflammation,
I decided to call and see
if maybe their treatment
of water only fasting
would be helpful to me.
>> At the True
North Health Center,
we take a rather clinical
approach to fasting.
All patients are
carefully screened
by both taking their
history as well as
reviewing their previous
medical treatment.
>> He was very honest in saying
that they had never treated
a patient with this
particular problem,
but he thought I
might have a chance.
When I initially
came to True North,
they asked me how
long I wanted to fast.
I didn't know I had
a choice in that.
I just thought
they would tell me.
>> Testing protocols here at the
Truth North Health Center can
range anywhere from
five to 40 days,
depending on the patient
and how they respond.
Not everybody or
not every condition
has a stereotypical
amount of time
that's associated with
its optimum outcome.
>> And I told him I was going to
fast until one of three things
happened, either the headache
went away or I could not fast
any longer or all of the
doctors got together and said
for my own safety I
needed to quit fasting.
People have wondered
of my commitment
to water only
fasting, but you have
to remember I had been in
serious pain every minute
of the day for 16 years.
I had tried everything that
traditional Western medicine
had to offer.
I had tried alternatives.
I also knew there was a very
good chance that I was going
to live to be an old lady.
We have longevity in my family.
And other than this
never-ending headache,
I really didn't have
any health problems.
And I did not want
to be 80 years old
one day, thinking, what
would have happened if I'd
gone to that True North place.
I wanted to try
everything that was
possible to get out of pain.
So I started fasting.
The doctors come
in twice a day--
>> They're monitored twice a
day by staff doctors during
their fasting experience,
where we're taking vitals
and monitoring their conditions.
>> --to check on you to
make sure you're doing well.
And every day it was the same
question, how are you doing?
And every day for 18 days,
it was the same answer.
I didn't have any change.
I still had the headache.
But then on day 19, I woke
up and I thought, uh-oh,
something's wrong.
I didn't know what it was,
but it was really scary,
because something was wrong.
And I decided I'm not
moving out of this bed
until I figure out what it was.
And I've got to say it
took me about a minute
to realize what was wrong is, I
didn't have a headache anymore.
I had forgotten what it
felt like not to be in pain.
And that lasted for
about five minutes.
And then I went down
to tell Dr. Goldhammer.
And if possible, I
think he might have
been more excited than I was.
He kept saying, it's
amenable to treatment.
It's amenable to treatment.
So I went through that
whole day wondering,
because the pain had only been
gone for about five minutes,
then it came back.
And I wondered, I
wondered if this
will happen again tomorrow.
The next morning I
woke up and I had
no pain for about 10 minutes.
And every day thereafter,
I had a little more time
without pain.
But almost even
better than that,
was during the
afternoon and evening,
my pain was decreasing a lot.
When I first got
to True North, they
asked me what my pain
was on the 0 to 10 scale.
And my answer was it's
about a 6 to an 8.5
all of the time
with the exception
of those rare moments
where it kicks up to a 10
when I truly could
not move, when
it would stop me in my tracks.
And after day 19 and the pain
started to reduce over time,
it finally got to the
point in the afternoon
where I was down
to a one or two.
You just can't imagine
what a blessing that was.
And finally on
day 41, I woke up,
I had had a whole
day without pain.
The doctors wanted me to quit.
And I was ready to quit fasting.
So on that day, I had
a full day without pain
for the first time in 16 years.
Dr. Goldhammer explained
that sometimes it
takes more than one
fast to solve a problem.
And it turned out that
happened with me as well.
When I started the
refeeding process, which
is a very careful reintroduction
of food after fasting,
I started to get some
twinges of pain on and off.
So after two months
of refeeding,
I went back to Dr.
Goldhammer and said--
and at the time,
I couldn't believe
I was asking to do this
again-- but I said,
I need to fast again,
what do you think?
And he said, he thought
that would be a good idea,
since I had had good
results on the first fast.
And I said, great, I'll
start again tomorrow.
And he said, oh, no, you
can't start fasting right now.
You've only been
refeeding for two months.
And I said, well,
what's the problem?
And he said you need to rebuild
your nutritional reserves.
That's very important.
And I said, well, how
long will that take?
And he said, with the length
of fast that you've done,
probably at least six months.
And then six months to the day
after I ended that first fast,
I started fasting
again, again, not
knowing how long I would fast.
And I just kept fasting until
all of the pain was gone,
turned out it was
another 40 days.
And then I started to refeed.
And at that point, I
didn't have any pain,
but I had worries that
it would come back,
but I just kept following
the doctor's recommendations
about what to eat, how to eat.
And it finally
dawned on me one day
that that headache was gone.
That was in 2010.
And I haven't had
a headache since.
>> Well, I found out about True
North through one of the talks
that Dr. Goldhammer gave
to our medical school.
And I remember seeing him
and thinking I definitely,
definitely need to do
an internship there.
>> We have an opportunity for
doctors to train in the use
of fasting.
We have about 30
clinicians a year
that come from medicine,
osteopathic, chiropractic, and
natural private colleges
as part of their rotation.
They're able to do rotations.
We're an indie residency save
for the naturopath health
profession.
And those doctors come
in and spend a year.
They've recently
completed, for example,
fasting safety
study, which shows
that fasting can be a safe
and effective means when
it's done properly.
>> The conclusion was that water
only fasting in a medically
supervised facility, such
as True North Health using
the True North Health Protocol,
because we didn't compare any
other protocols,
is relatively safe.
>> We're actually very excited,
because the we see a wide range
of conditions that tend to
respond to this approach.
And now we're in a
position, finally,
with the help of our nonprofit
Truth Health Foundation
to begin to document
those results
and present them in
a way that I think
both clinicians and scientists
will find acceptable.
>> What the foundation is
now doing is turning that
into accepted peer reviewed
published research.
And so we're doing the
human subjects research,
bringing people in to look at
how fasting changes biomarkers
in the blood, taste and
adaptation, different studies.
So we'll actually have
published material
that we can show people.
And people will
start seeing fasting
as a modality of healing that
really does amazing things
and has been for
millennia for human.
>> For example, in the treatment
of high blood pressure,
we did a study with our
colleague T Colin Campbell from
Cornell University.
We took 174 consecutive patients
that had high blood pressure.
And we put them through
a period of fasting,
followed by a whole plant food,
sugar, oil, and salt-free diet.
Of the 174 consecutive patients
with high blood pressure,
174 people lowered
the pressure enough
to eliminate the
need for medication.
And in that study, we
were able to demonstrate
in effect size of over 60 points
average drop in stage three
hypertension.
That's the largest
effect that's ever
been shown in treating
high blood pressure
in humans as far as I'm aware.
Essentially, if you
have high blood pressure
and you undergo fasting and
make diet and lifestyle changes,
you have an exceptionally
high likelihood
of being able to normalize
your blood pressure.
And if you're willing to do
really dangerous and radical
things, like eat good and
exercise, go to bed on time,
you have an excellent
chance of being
able to maintain those results.
>> Reason I stayed after my
residency at True North is
because we see that on
an everyday basis here,
you don't have to be here for
years in order to understand
the profound effect
that water fasting has.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> If someone is going
too fast for a day or two,
most people in the United States
are going to have absolutely no
issues with that.
We have plenty of fat reserves.
We can do that.
It is important to make
sure that people are getting
adequate amounts of
fluids during that,
because dehydration
can be very dangerous.
>> I think what's happening
right now is that a lot
of people are improvising.
>> If someone's going to go
and say, as you mentioned,
a 21-day fast, that is something
that I think should actually be
monitored, that
people are doing well.
>> So fasting and refeeding
cycles are extremely powerful,
probably more powerful than
a powerful cocktail of drugs.
And so when you
eliminate the doctor,
you eliminate the
registered dietitian,
you eliminate something that
is being clinically tested.
You're now really
putting yourself
in very dangerous position.
And it could be that it's
not very dangerous to you
today, because maybe your
immune system is fine.
You're not taking
any other drugs,
but maybe two years under
all, you try it again,
now all of a sudden
you're immunosuppressed,
or you have a viral
infection, or you're
taking a drug for diabetes,
or you're taking another drug.
And now together, they
become very problematic,
like the infection now could
become a little infection
or the insulin.
Now we know some
of the people that
have died in clinics
that do fasting
have died from a combination
of insulin and fasting.
So something-- even when
I talked to dietologists,
endocrinologist and they say,
oh, your patient could die.
Immediately, their answer is
come on, this is not possible.
These are doctors.
These are experienced doctors.
They don't realize how
combining drug with fasting
can turn two very innocuous
things into something
that can even be lethal.
For example, metformin very
safe, very widely utilized.
Well, metformin happens to be
a gluconeogenesis inhibitor.
And guess what?
Fasting requires
gluconeogenesis.
Now you take a block of
gluconeogenesis and something
that requires to survive, if
you don't have gluconeogenesis--
and gluconeogenesis refers
to liver making new glucose--
if you block it on one
side and you require it
on the other side,
you can see you have
a very problematic situation.
Now think about the fact that
a hundred million Americans
are either diabetic
or pre-diabetic.
And so all of them are eligible.
So one American in three or
so is eligible for metformin.
And pretty soon we'll
be on metformin.
You see how now the
combination of fasting
or the improvisation
with fasting
could be extremely dangerous.
>> This was the scariest thing
that I have ever experienced.
And I really thought
that I was going
to lose my life at one point.
I decided to do my
35-day extended water
fast in a fasting clinic
outside of Canada.
I was fasting
alongside other people
about 30, 40 people I
think we were in total.
And it turned out actually that
there was a significant issue
with the water.
And so even with that, even
with poor quality water,
everybody at the center
from what I witnessed
did really well, in general,
up until about three weeks.
So up until about 21 days.
And after that,
things sort of started
to go down south,
not just for me,
but for numerous
other people as well.
By about day 26, I was really--
instinctively, I felt a
powerful urge to end my fast.
And I ignored that urge.
And by ignoring that
urge, I got really sick.
My roommate almost got raped.
There was a guy with
psychosis who slit his wrists
and had to be rushed
to the hospital.
It turned out he had
hyponatremia trauma.
So it's where your sodium
levels crashed so much
that your potassium levels
sky rocket and you actually
go into a mental psychosis.
One girl was so dehydrated
she went to the hospital
and had to be on IV.
And the other girl almost died.
I felt helpless.
I felt sort of desperate and
terrified, like terrified.
There was a woman who
was there and her mother
came to the center
and was terrified,
because her daughter had
been so ill and dehydrated.
And she had all the
symptoms of renal failure.
I felt certain that
she was going to die.
And I remember
being up all night
thinking this poor
girl came here
to save her own life
to heal and repair.
And she literally almost died.
Her mother took
her to the hospital
against our fasting
supervisors directive.
And she was told that she
was in such bad renal failure
and so dangerously
dehydrated that she was--
they weren't sure she
was going to make it.
What I discovered
a little bit late
is that it's very important
to research a fasting facility
and make sure that you're in
the care of people that really
can medically supervise you,
make sure everything's OK.
When things turned
for me on day 28,
I was really
fearful for my life.
I actually snuck in to
use a computer at a time
when we weren't supposed to.
And I wrote messages to
personal people in my life,
like telling them
that I wasn't well.
And that I was afraid that I
would lose my life and that I--
I felt more unwell
than I had ever felt.
Because I fasted too long and
didn't get appropriate care,
I think what ended
up happening was
I had a lot of health problems.
I had something called moon
face, extreme inflammation
in my face.
In my whole body, I had
edema and water retention
from how dehydrated I had been,
how off my electrolytes were,
weight gain.
I gained a lot of weight,
about 30 pounds actually,
or 28 pounds in
two weeks as soon
as I started eating salt, even
small amounts of cooked food.
It took me two years of eating
regularly and nurturing my body
and trying to tough out
all of these symptoms.
I now two years later, I'm
finally completely feeling
like myself again.
I look like myself again.
Fasting needs boundaries.
I almost killed myself
through extremism
with my eating disorder and
all of my misuse of food.
And then I healed myself
through the right modalities,
finally brought
myself back to health
with a moderate and balanced
intermittent fasting,
juicing, eating
healthy, developing
a healthy relationship to food,
and then took it a step too far
again, did extremism,
and almost died again
with my long water
fast, making myself
sick for an additional
two awful years,
only to then find balance
again to finally again go back
to a moderate way of just
intermittent fasting,
getting the benefit
without extreme.
Fasting needs boundaries.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> That's the brilliant part of
the fasting mimicking diet is
that at the Longevity Institute,
they did research for many,
many years and discovered how to
use food to fly under the radar
of what we call mTOR,
the detection of food.
So you're actually eating food.
So your body sees food, but
your brain sees fasting.
>> The NCI, the National Cancer
Institute gave us the funds
to do that.
And we come up with
a fasting mimicking
diet that is as effective as
fasting, as water only fasting.
>> It's five days, but the
five days of eating the fasting
mimicking diet gives you the
same benefits as if you did
a complete water fast, nothing
but water for four days.
>> And we call it fasting with
food, which is a fascinating,
or fascinated concept.
And L-Nutra 2016 launched
Prolon, the very first fasting
mimicking diet.
And Prolon for Promoting
Health and Longevity.
>> I first heard about Prolon
when I asked Valter Longo, Dr.
Valter Longo, if I could
you him for my website,
where I write about healing
naturally from inflammatory
disorders.
I had this wonderful
conversation
about how his fasting
mimicking diet can turnover up
to 40% of white blood cells
in the immune system, which
is fantastic news, because for
people with the disorder I had,
which is the reason I
left CNN and the BBC.
I was working as a journalist
in war zones for about a decade,
until I got really sick.
And I couldn't work anymore.
And I devoted myself to
blogging about these conditions.
I tried the five day fasting
mimicking diet, the Prolon.
My first round of Prolon
was pretty amazing.
It was the first time
in my life that I
had had complete relief from
my symptoms of mass cell
activation.
I mean, just absolute and
total remission of symptoms,
just so, so quickly.
And it lasted for about for
about a month I would say,
which is--
I have understood that I
need to do it once a month.
I was diagnosed with a
very rare, only 10% to 20%
of all cases, are
this type of cancer,
with a very rare and
very, very aggressive.
It's called triple
negative breast cancer.
Coincidence, I had just
arrived in LA thankfully,
because I was told
that I could join
a medical trial for their
new fasting product, which
is called Chemo Leave.
>> And they're looking at it
in cancer patients to improve
the efficacy and
safety of chemotherapy.
>> We are seeing we find that
mice and probably patients
become protected against
chemotherapy and the cancer
cells instead don't--
when you just use
fasting cycles, usually
at least in mice,
fasting cycles are
as powerful as
chemotherapy, but it
is the combination of
fasting and chemotherapy
that is really effective.
And that's where
we see 20% to 60%
of mice becoming cancer free in
response to that combination.
And this is true for many
different types of cancers.
>> And that was a number
that made me think, OK,
so I'm going to do both,
especially when I was told that
it would protect my
body, my immune system.
And I just thought I
really can't pass that up.
Amazing thing is that I have
this pre-existing inflammatory
condition, the mast cell
activation syndrome, which
means that part of my immune
system is kind of on the fritz.
And it's these
cells, the mast cells
are constantly releasing
inflammation into the body.
And so consequently,
we're really
susceptible to
allergy-type things.
There's nothing more allergy
inducing than chemotherapy,
which is why they give you
steroids the day before,
the day of, and the day after,
and then maybe every day
after that, depending
on how you react.
Let me tell you, I went
through one cycle out of eight
without the Chemo
Leave, because I fasted.
And then there was a scheduling
mix up at the hospital.
And I wasn't able to do
my treatment that day.
So the difference
between the time
that I went without
it and the time
that I went-- the times
that I did the Chemo Leave,
I felt myself going
into shock while I
was receiving the chemotherapy
that time without the Chemo
Leave.
And I firmly believe that
I was OK the other times,
because my immune system
was being protected.
All the genetic
testing that I did
revealed was that my tumor had
certain characteristics that
respond to fasting,
which is amazing.
So I can actually switch off
the genes that were expressing--
the troublesome
genes that were found
in my tumor that were driving
the growth of the tumor
are turned off by fasting.
The reaction of most
people when you tell them
that you're going
through chemotherapy
is absolutely horror.
Nowadays we have
medications that
can handle the side effects.
You know, people
are on steroids.
They're on two or
three different kinds
of antihistamines or medication
to stop them from throwing up.
They're on medication
to help them sleep.
They're on medication--
they're on beta blockers
to block the adrenaline, because
they're having so much anxiety.
They're on Xanax,
stuff like that.
I didn't take most
of what I was given.
I was kickboxing for an hour
at a time, three days a week.
I was doing yoga.
I was standing on my head.
I was doing headstands.
I was almost doing acroyoga.
I was running up to 45
minutes a day, but the cycle
that I didn't do the fasting,
I struggled to exercise.
I maintain my weight
throughout the whole thing.
People keep telling me
things happen for a reason.
And it's kind of what kept me
going through the whole cancer
thing and thinking
I need to is how
everybody about the fasting.
| need to tell everybody,
because I think
it's going to save sanity.
I think it's going
to save lives.
Sometimes something
is so life-changing
that you can't help
but want to shout it
out to absolutely
everybody you meet,
because what you
experienced was so profound.
>> One of the problems with
fasting and fasting mimicking
diets are what you're
essentially selling is nothing.
You're selling the idea that
your body can fix itself if we
remove all of the stimuli.
So monetizing that can be a
real challenge, getting people
to care and invest money in
something where essentially
the benefit is other people get
better is the ultimate goal,
but it's not a
very good business
model for the most part.
That's one of the
challenges in getting people
to care about this is,
what's in it for me?
>> It's a little tricky.
What do you do with drugs?
And it should be
handled by people
that have spend a lot of time.
So I encourage anybody that is
thinking about a clinical trial
to contact us and have our
contribution in developing
the clinical protocol
for the trial.
>> Recently published
just a few months ago,
a major paper in Cell, showing
that fasting mimicking diet
some five to six cycles are able
in mice models to reverse type
1 and type 2 diabetes.
This is the first
time in history
that the reverse of
diabetes could be done.
And again, it's due to the
stem cell rejuvenation.
The stem cells in the body
when the body is starved,
they actually specialize in
beta cells in the pancreas
and allow the pancreas
to reproduce insulin
and decrease glucose
in the blood.
>> Beta cells in the pancreas
are rejuvenated, regenerated.
>> There is nothing in medicine
today that can induce these
effects.
>> We think it's a very old
program that is not that
different from what happens
when you cut yourself.
So you cut yourself.
And within a few
weeks, everything
goes back to almost
a perfect state.
So the body really
knows how to repair
itself is that probably fasting
is always being used as a way
to get rid of bad cells,
turn on stem cells,
regenerate for tens
of thousands of years.
And now in the last
100 years or so,
we eat so much, all the time.
And most patients that
we talk to have never
gone more than a day
or so without food.
>> So it turns out that once
you get to about the third day
of not having any food,
then your body has to go
into action.
>> After two days, either on
a complete fast or a fasting
mimicking diet, now the
body starts really entering
a starvation response mark.
>> The body then starts shedding
elderly cells and cells with
DNA damage, because these
are consuming calories.
They're not doing
their job right though.
And then as the body starts
pushing the stem cells,
the young cause affected from
the carrier stem point cells,
pushes them to
actually replace those.
And now you have new
cells in the body
replicating and taking action.
This is what we call part of
the rejuvenation in the body
due to the consecutive or
longer period of fasting
what we call today prolonged
or periodic fasting.
In terms of stem cells, you
will not stimulate stem cells.
You won't get brain driving
neurotrophic factor increased,
unless you fast for at
least three to four days.
>> You need to realize that
stem cells are the repairman
of the body.
They're all over your body.
And they're constantly working
to repair little bits of damage
that happen every day.
But think what would
happen if those stem
cells stopped doing their job.
And that's what happens
in a lot of patients,
who really aren't living
a healthy lifestyle is
those cells can get hurt.
And they're not doing their job.
So injuries stack up.
In 2004 I was reading
an animal study
on a rabbit that showed that
you could take mesenchymal stem
cells and regrow a disc.
Obviously, that
caught my attention,
because we had a lot of back
pain patients with bad disc.
So I sought out some
researchers that
were using mesenchymal stem
cells to treat injuries.
And they were
doing it in horses.
And so we reported
that over to humans.
So today, we've published
50% of all of the patients
in the world literature who have
been treated with stem cells
and who have
orthopedic problems.
What we can say at this
point is that the environment
that your stem cells
are in can have
a dramatic impact on
their ability to grow,
proliferate, and do what
they're supposed to.
That environment can
be affected by diet,
can be affected by exercise,
can be affected by medications.
>> Every thing in the body
has multiple functions,
multiple sites of action.
So when you give a drug that
you think is working one site,
it's working and doing things
all over the body in ways
that we may not even comprehend.
That's why when you
look at pharmaceuticals,
the list of side
effects are huge,
and often including death.
If you've watched television
and you see the commercials
for many of the
pharmaceuticals, they actually
show people having
a wonderful time.
And then they say and, by the
way, this drug may kill you.
That is one thing
that does not happen
when you eat the right
foods, when you exercise,
when you incorporate
periodic fasting.
>> So what we found was
that high blood pressure
medications,
cholesterol medications,
these are common things taken by
many, many different Americans,
but they hurt their stem cells
ability to grow and culture.
So that's not a good thing
if you think about the fact
that these medications are
impacting your body's own stem
cells and their ability to
maintain and repair that body.
That's a big problem.
So as an example, we've
treated lots of patients
through the years with
tendinopathy due to taking
a specific type of antibiotic.
>> I literally
became debilitated.
I had shoulder pain,
neck pain, leg pain.
I could barely walk.
I even had a hard
time breathing.
Two of my discs had completely
herniated into my spine.
I really felt I was dying.
>> It was a known
problem though.
They'll take this
antibiotic, because they
have a common cold.
And the next thing they
know, they're in chronic pain
all over their body.
Why?
Because that
particular antibiotic
reduces the stem cells
ability in their body
to repair their tendons.
And we all get tendon
wear and tear every day
that needs to be repaired.
So one of the things
we started realizing
is that when we were going to
use the patient's own cells
to try to repair
something, we had
to have patients clean
up their lifestyle,
including their diet.
We make sure that they're
fasting when they come in,
because we know that fasting
can increase the body's ability
to help prepare itself.
>> For the next several weeks,
after each time I do a fasting
mimicking diet, I end up with
a significantly reduced pain
in all my joints.
>> Polycystic ovary syndrome,
that's one of my niches.
I deal a lot with hormones.
If you take an
unhealthy woman and you
trick her body into
getting pregnant,
often it will be rejected.
And if it's successful, it's
not usually very successful,
because you often will have
very severe complications later
on towards the end of
pregnancy, like high blood
pressure, toxemia, preterm
labor, a lot of diabetes,
many, many complications
in these women
when they do not
get them healthy,
but trick them into
getting pregnant.
So then she came to
me and she just said,
I've tried the
conventional route.
I've spent thousands of
dollars trying to get pregnant.
And, well, I've heard that there
is this integrative approach.
So what can you do to help me?
She did everything I asked.
So she had a large breakfast.
She had a medium lunch.
She had a tiny dinner.
She didn't eat after 7:00 PM.
She began exercising.
She ate no processed foods.
She did everything right.
Then after a month,
I put her on Prolon.
After three cycles,
she got pregnant.
That was almost a year ago.
And she has recently
delivered her baby.
She is a beautiful healthy baby.
She is in her late 30s now.
She's been trying
for all these years.
>> Depending on the
therapeutic use,
you have to really
understand this and use it
to your advantage.
So for example, when we do
it for metabolic syndrome,
diabetes, and cancer, we
do between four and five
days of fasting together
with various therapies.
That's sufficient.
When we look at autoimmunities,
instead we go to seven days.
Why do we do that?
Because we now want
to do more destruction
of damaged cells, the
autoimmune cells, in this case.
So if you do a
shorter fast, you're
not really going to benefit
that much, because you
don't have enough time to
destroy the damaged cells.
And also, you have
less rebuilding
using the stem cells.
So this is why it's so important
to understand the mechanisms
behind it and for each
purpose really using
a different fasting-based
intervention.
>> I was working on a
documentary for the BBC,
"What if We Could
Stay Young Forever?"
We were looking at diet
and exercise and lifestyle.
I met Dr. Valter Longo
to talk about his work.
And it was at the
time he was preparing
for his clinical
trial and suggested
that I might like to be one of
the volunteers in that trial.
So the trial involved what is
known as a fasting mimicking
diet over five consecutive days.
And that was
repeated three times.
>> One of the things that our
large clinical trials have
shown is that at the very least
we know that fasting mimicking
diets are safe for
the average person.
>> Probably the number one thing
that I noticed is his weight
control.
>> The past year I have
prescribed Prolon diet to about
120, 130 patients.
Out of them come to me
saying, I tried all the diets.
And I can't lose weight.
Well, I tell them well
let me prove you wrong.
Let's try this diet.
And you will see that
you will lose weight.
All of them have lost weight.
>> The other things we saw
is that you do have to train
the body.
It's a little bit
like working out.
If you just do this
once for five days,
you'll get a lot
of the benefits,
quite a bit of
weight loss, a number
of other metabolic markers
may be affected as well.
But you will eventually
return to normal
if you make no other
lifestyle changes
over the period of the next
several weeks to months.
If you do this consecutively
for three months
in a row of five days at
the beginning of each month,
we see that you maintain a
much more significant amount
of the benefits over a
much longer period of time.
>> I find Prolon to be a
breakthrough in the care that I
give to diabetics.
>> Ideally, once a quarter
is about what appears to be
the kind of set point to keep
that sort of cellular muscle
tone, as you will, to keep the
body in shape for nutrition.
Dr. Longo actually
did a study where
he did two groups of mice.
One group they both take
the same total calories
during the study.
One group had fasting mimicking
mixed in and then overate.
And the other group made the
same amount the whole time.
And the group that overate
with fasting mimicking diet
was still skinny.
And the other group
of mice was obese.
So it is really about training
the cells how to use nutrition.
You can take in even potentially
less good for you foods
if your body's in shape.
And it will do the
right things with them.
>> They'll say they've lost
up to eight pounds a week.
They have more energy,
they feel better.
>> I've been trying to convince
this patient for months
and months, maybe a year
to try to give up his soda.
It just took five days with
Prolon for him to stop.
>> This is the brilliance of the
fasting mimicking diet that we
get to harness our inner powers
to heal while simultaneously
enjoying food.
So what could be better?
>> What we've been teaching here
since 1956 is that people ought
not to be eating solid food
until approximately 10:00
or so in the morning.
We wind down in the evening.
Ideally, you don't eat
after 5, but the latest
would be 6 or 7
o'clock at night,
providing you go to bed
then three hours later.
Now this is something
we've observed
with hundreds and
hundreds of thousands
of people for over 60 years.
This is no longer a
theory or a philosophy.
And the scientific
community now has
validated what
we've been observing
in a clinical setting.
So all of our guests here are
encouraged to do at least a one
day a week fast.
>> I had the privilege of
directing one of the most
renowned fasting clinics
in Europe in Sweden.
So the government realized
they needed to do research.
And they spend about 2 and
1/2 billion dollar to find,
but it was like
90% success rate.
And we actually got certified.
And by doing that
to us, any physician
that thought, well, you have
an inflammatory problem,
because fasting was
definitely something that
worked as an anti-inflammatory
with arthritis,
rheumatoid arthritis, and
gout, and asthma, emphysema,
psoriasis, eczema, you
name it, everything
just about under the sun,
and diabetes, cardiovascular,
obesity, Crohn's, colitis,
then actually 80% of their feet
would be paid by the government.
So this was back in
the mid '70s and ran
until beginning of '80s.
It disappeared when a new group
came in to the government.
The problem is it wasn't
replaced by something
that was even better.
They didn't have a
90% success rate.
I think those people
were influenced by money,
as simple as that.
>> I was driving and all
the cars were disappearing
into an abyss into a mirror.
And the white lanes
were going up and down.
And my head was
pounding so bad that I
felt like someone
was taking a crowbar
and pulling apart my head.
I pulled over on this
side of the turnpike.
I had a four pound
brain tumor that
was surgically removed at the
National Institutes of Health.
It was the biggest ordeal
that I ever went through.
They drilled six holes into
my head and 47 staple scar.
When I was diagnosed with
two more brain cancers,
I just fell apart.
I could not handle
having surgery.
I couldn't handle chemo.
>> Here at Hippocrates,
ever since 1956,
we've been dealing with tens
of thousands of people who have
cancer.
>> In October of 2012, I
found a lump in my breast.
>> It was cancer.
This cancer had grabbed a hold
of everything behind my knee
and bundled them.
So they couldn't do
anything, but cut my leg off
above the knee.
>> And the last three
oncologists that we consulted
with, second or third opinions,
all said the same thing,
that she has to have the leg
removed or she's going to die.
No mistake about that.
>> Of course, fasting has
always been a big part,
a significant part of the
caloric intake and dietary part
of our program.
But those who condone water
fasting in the case of people
who are in the conquest
of all forms of cancer,
we don't think it's
really prudent.
You need caloric intake.
You need the protein
that literally
comes from the juices
we suggest here,
which are non-sugary juices
made out of green vegetables,
green leaves, and most
important sprouts that have very
high amounts of amino acids.
And these amino
acids are something
that the body requires
to maintain the strength
and the viability of the cells.
Now we're made of cells.
You have 100 trillion cells
that make up your body.
And this tends to break down.
The emaciation you
see from cancer
basically is a
protein degradation.
>> I end up doing
it for three months.
And when I went back
to the oncologists,
I did the MRI with contrast.
We got the results, no cancer.
>> I maintained this lifestyle
very strictly for a full year
and at the same time continued
to see that lump diminish until
now it's gone.
>> I'm 91, this
little girl is 90.
>> For 21 years, I
have been cancer-free.
We are great dancers.
We now teach people at
Golden Lakes to dance
>> And we kiss.
>> I get these horrible skin
rashes on my face and my body.
Coming to a place
like Hippocrates
would make my life and
just the fasting experience
a lot easier.
>> For me just doing water
fasting wasn't going to work.
Even more than a day
was very difficult,
just for me personally.
I can only speak from
personal experience,
but if I were to do
the juice fasting,
it was easier, because
I was able to still
have that intake of food.
>> And today is actually the
fourth day that I'm coming out.
I'm easing myself
gently out of fast.
My skin just smoothing out.
I didn't have the red marks
I usually have on my arms
and in my face.
>> I lost 40 pounds in
90 days on a juice fast,
never gained it back.
>> So the problems we have
today that 2/3 of Americans are
obese, 5% morbidly obese,
diabetes, cancer, arthritis.
All of this should
never have happened.
We had this solution
in the '70s.
We really need to
realize there's
nothing new under the sun.
Get back on the track
with your own lifestyle.
Whatever religion,
whatever country
you come from, I think
you will agree with this,
we have to take our
responsibility in our own hands
and have the life for our
family, for our children,
and our grandchildren
that they deserve.
They deserve an amazing life.
And I think most of us are
looking right now at the future
and saying, how are they
going to deal with this?
How are they going to
deal with the diseases?
deal with food that's
not nutritious with all the
chemicals, the pollution
in our water and our air?
How are you going
to deal with it?
Well, it's time we deal with it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]